README.md, before:

# Phase_3_Project

#### David Johnson and Elina Rankova

<div style="width: 100%; text-align: center;">
  <img src="https://media.licdn.com/dms/image/C4D12AQH-Qk_eTZv6iA/article-cover_image-shrink_720_1280/0/1622638706496?e=1715212800&v=beta&t=a3k-gWfqrlzfv7inhVBpUU9xxPjnJ0of4viF4tFu-Oc" width="720" height="450" style="margin: 0 auto;"/>
</div>

<u>image source</u>: <a href="https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/churn-analysis-smriti-saini/">Churn Analysis Article</a>

# Business Problem and Understanding

**Stakeholders:** Director of Member Operations, Member Operations Manager, Member Retention Manager, Member Support Manager

The business problem at hand is to predict customer churn for SyriaTel, a telecommunications company, in order to minimize revenue loss and enhance customer retention efforts. With customer attrition posing a significant challenge to profitability in the telecom industry, SyriaTel seeks to identify patterns and trends within its customer base that indicate potential churn. By leveraging historical data and predictive modeling techniques, the aim is to develop a classifier that can accurately forecast which customers are likely to discontinue their services, enabling SyriaTel to implement targeted retention strategies and ultimately strengthen its competitive position in the market.

**The goal:** Create a model to predict churn in telecom members contacting support. We are aiming to reduce the amount of cases in which members are mistakenly identified as retained (false negative) vs mistakenly identified as churned to ensure we capture all members who may churn (positive).

# Data Understanding and Exploration

For this analysis, the SyriaTel churn data was sourced from <a href = "https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/becksddf/churn-in-telecoms-dataset">Kaggle</a>

The dataset contains data on the customers of a Telecom company. Each row represents a customer and the columns contain customer’s attributes such as minutes, number of calls, and charge for each time of day and international. In addition we also have information about the customer's voicemail and customer call behavior.

### Observations:
- The dataset has no missingness and most columns are numeric
- Of the 3,333 customers in this dataset, 483 terminated their contract with SyriaTel
- Transforming target `churn` as well as `international_plan` and `voice_mail_plan` to binary 0/1 is needed
- `state` appears numeric but is actually categorical and needs to be transformed as well
- `phone_number` can be dropped as there are no duplicate entries

#### Class Imbalance
This is an imbalanced dataset, with 14.5% of customers lost, balancing will be necessary 

![alt text] (Phase_3_Project/Images/Class Imbalance.jpeg)

#### There are several correlations worth noting:
`total_intl_charge`, `total_day_charge`, total_eve_charge`, and `total_night_charge` is perfectly correlated with `total_intl_minutes`, `total_day_minutes`, total_eve_minutes`, and `total_night_minutes` respectively. This makes sense since the company is charging by the minute. 
> If we need to, we can confidently drop the 'charge' column from each category; day, eve, night, and intl. We can keep the 'minutes' category as it is unclear what currency metric 'charge' is referring to.

In addition, there is a near perfect correlation between `number_vmail_messages` and `voice_mail_plan`, this makes sense and these two columns much like 'charge' and 'minutes' are telling us the same thing. 
> If we need to, we can drop `number_vmail_messages`.

Lastly, there are a couple of weak correlations associated with our target `churn` variable; It seems `customer_service_calls`, `international_plan` and `total_day_minutes` have a slight positive correlation with churn. 
> While weak correlations, we would want to consider including these features in our models.

![alt text](Phase_3_Project/Images/Data Exploration Heatmap.jpeg)

# Data Preperation

To prepare the data for modeling, several steps had to be taken as described below. All train/test splits maintain the default .75/.25 proportion respectively. We know we have class imbalance, so we will have `stratify = y` so our class proportions stay the same for both our train and test data.

## Model 1 & 2
Given our selected approach to these `LogisticRegression` models, we had slightly different steps applied depending on the model. All train/test splits maintain 

#### Pre-Split

Before splitting our data between train and test, we performed some simple processing:

- Since the column names were formatted with a space between words, we transformed them to include and underscore as per column name standard formatting
- `LabelEncoder` was used to perform transformtions on the following categorical columns:
  - `churn` orriginally in binary True/False format
  - `international_plan` and `voice_mail_plan` in binary Yes/No format
- Dropped `phone_number` column as there were no duplicate entries as mentioned previously

#### Post-Split

After splitting our data into a train and test we had to perform a couple of other transformations depending on the model criteria.

For the first two models we used `OneHotEncoder` to transform the `area_code` and `state` categorical columns to numerical format. This left us with an `X_train` containing 69 features. In addition, we used `SMOTE` to resample our data and handle class imbalance.

**Model 2 with `SelectFromModel`** to aid with important feature selection we called on this meta-transformer to reduce our 

## Model 3

For our 3rd model we took a manual approach and redefined the DataFrame criteria which lead us to having to conduct a fresh train/test split.

#### Pre-Split

We decided to only include highly correlated variables since we had previously stated there were some features which had extremely high correlations with eachother. For this model we were left with only the features seen below in a heatmap no longer demonstrating any co-linearity.

![alt text](Phase_3_Project/Images/Model 3 Heatmap.jpeg)

Since tranforming column names applies generally to the dataframe, we did not have to repeat this as it was already complete as the first pre-processing step.

#### Post-Split

Since we redefined a new `X` and `y` we also applied `SMOTE` to this fresh data set, creating reduced versious of our training data. 
> Sinced we eliminated any categorical columns in need of transformation, the `OneHotEncoder` was not necessary for this model.

# Modeling

Focusing on predicting churn, we will focus on finetuning to the `recall` metric to ensure we are predicting as many True Positive results (customers predicted to churn who churn) and reducing False Negative (customers predicted to be retained who churn) as much as possible. 

Our business initiatives are not high risk so a somewhat disproportionate amount of False Positives (customers predicted to churn who are retained) is tolerated and approach to this sect of customers will be addressed within our evaluation and recommendations.

#### Base Model
We build our base model with `DummyClassifier` using the `stratified` strategy since we have an imbalanced dataset skewed in the direction of class 0 when we are interested in predicting class 1. We do not apply `SMOTE` here to get truly baseline results.

From the get go our Base model produced an average `accuracy` score of ~0.75. This is a good start and gives us confidence to proceed with improving our `recall` and still maintianing fairly balanced results.

#### 1st Model
To start,

Commit message:

Update README.md table test

README.md, after:

# Phase_3_Project

#### David Johnson and Elina Rankova

<div style="width: 100%; text-align: center;">
  <img src="https://media.licdn.com/dms/image/C4D12AQH-Qk_eTZv6iA/article-cover_image-shrink_720_1280/0/1622638706496?e=1715212800&v=beta&t=a3k-gWfqrlzfv7inhVBpUU9xxPjnJ0of4viF4tFu-Oc" width="720" height="450" style="margin: 0 auto;"/>
</div>

<u>image source</u>: <a href="https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/churn-analysis-smriti-saini/">Churn Analysis Article</a>

# Business Problem and Understanding

**Stakeholders:** Director of Member Operations, Member Operations Manager, Member Retention Manager, Member Support Manager

The business problem at hand is to predict customer churn for SyriaTel, a telecommunications company, in order to minimize revenue loss and enhance customer retention efforts. With customer attrition posing a significant challenge to profitability in the telecom industry, SyriaTel seeks to identify patterns and trends within its customer base that indicate potential churn. By leveraging historical data and predictive modeling techniques, the aim is to develop a classifier that can accurately forecast which customers are likely to discontinue their services, enabling SyriaTel to implement targeted retention strategies and ultimately strengthen its competitive position in the market.

**The goal:** Create a model to predict churn in telecom members contacting support. We are aiming to reduce the amount of cases in which members are mistakenly identified as retained (false negative) vs mistakenly identified as churned to ensure we capture all members who may churn (positive).

# Data Understanding and Exploration

For this analysis, the SyriaTel churn data was sourced from <a href = "https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/becksddf/churn-in-telecoms-dataset">Kaggle</a>

The dataset contains data on the customers of a Telecom company. Each row represents a customer and the columns contain customer’s attributes such as minutes, number of calls, and charge for each time of day and international. In addition we also have information about the customer's voicemail and customer call behavior.

### Observations:
- The dataset has no missingness and most columns are numeric
- Of the 3,333 customers in this dataset, 483 terminated their contract with SyriaTel
- Transforming target `churn` as well as `international_plan` and `voice_mail_plan` to binary 0/1 is needed
- `state` appears numeric but is actually categorical and needs to be transformed as well
- `phone_number` can be dropped as there are no duplicate entries

#### Class Imbalance
This is an imbalanced dataset, with 14.5% of customers lost, balancing will be necessary 

![alt text] (Phase_3_Project/Images/Class Imbalance.jpeg)

#### There are several correlations worth noting:
`total_intl_charge`, `total_day_charge`, total_eve_charge`, and `total_night_charge` is perfectly correlated with `total_intl_minutes`, `total_day_minutes`, total_eve_minutes`, and `total_night_minutes` respectively. This makes sense since the company is charging by the minute. 
> If we need to, we can confidently drop the 'charge' column from each category; day, eve, night, and intl. We can keep the 'minutes' category as it is unclear what currency metric 'charge' is referring to.

In addition, there is a near perfect correlation between `number_vmail_messages` and `voice_mail_plan`, this makes sense and these two columns much like 'charge' and 'minutes' are telling us the same thing. 
> If we need to, we can drop `number_vmail_messages`.

Lastly, there are a couple of weak correlations associated with our target `churn` variable; It seems `customer_service_calls`, `international_plan` and `total_day_minutes` have a slight positive correlation with churn. 
> While weak correlations, we would want to consider including these features in our models.

![alt text](Phase_3_Project/Images/Data Exploration Heatmap.jpeg)

# Data Preperation

To prepare the data for modeling, several steps had to be taken as described below. All train/test splits maintain the default .75/.25 proportion respectively. We know we have class imbalance, so we will have `stratify = y` so our class proportions stay the same for both our train and test data.

## Model 1 & 2
Given our selected approach to these `LogisticRegression` models, we had slightly different steps applied depending on the model. All train/test splits maintain 

#### Pre-Split

Before splitting our data between train and test, we performed some simple processing:

- Since the column names were formatted with a space between words, we transformed them to include and underscore as per column name standard formatting
- `LabelEncoder` was used to perform transformtions on the following categorical columns:
  - `churn` orriginally in binary True/False format
  - `international_plan` and `voice_mail_plan` in binary Yes/No format
- Dropped `phone_number` column as there were no duplicate entries as mentioned previously

#### Post-Split

After splitting our data into a train and test we had to perform a couple of other transformations depending on the model criteria.

For the first two models we used `OneHotEncoder` to transform the `area_code` and `state` categorical columns to numerical format. This left us with an `X_train` containing 69 features. In addition, we used `SMOTE` to resample our data and handle class imbalance.

**Model 2 with `SelectFromModel`** to aid with important feature selection we called on this meta-transformer to reduce our 

## Model 3

For our 3rd model we took a manual approach and redefined the DataFrame criteria which lead us to having to conduct a fresh train/test split.

#### Pre-Split

We decided to only include highly correlated variables since we had previously stated there were some features which had extremely high correlations with eachother. For this model we were left with only the features seen below in a heatmap no longer demonstrating any co-linearity.

![alt text](Phase_3_Project/Images/Model 3 Heatmap.jpeg)

Since tranforming column names applies generally to the dataframe, we did not have to repeat this as it was already complete as the first pre-processing step.

#### Post-Split

Since we redefined a new `X` and `y` we also applied `SMOTE` to this fresh data set, creating reduced versious of our training data. 
> Sinced we eliminated any categorical columns in need of transformation, the `OneHotEncoder` was not necessary for this model.

# Modeling

Focusing on predicting churn, we will focus on finetuning to the `recall` metric to ensure we are predicting as many True Positive results (customers predicted to churn who churn) and reducing False Negative (customers predicted to be retained who churn) as much as possible. 

Our business initiatives are not high risk so a somewhat disproportionate amount of False Positives (customers predicted to churn who are retained) is tolerated and approach to this sect of customers will be addressed within our evaluation and recommendations.

#### Base Model
We build our base model with `DummyClassifier` using the `stratified` strategy since we have an imbalanced dataset skewed in the direction of class 0 when we are interested in predicting class 1. We do not apply `SMOTE` here to get truly baseline results.

From the get go our Base model produced an average `accuracy` score of ~0.75. This is a good start and gives us confidence to proceed with improving our `recall` and still maintianing fairly balanced results.

#### 1st Model
To start, we evaluate a basic `LogisticRegression` model, before applying `SMOTE`. We use the detault L2 penalty with this initial model.

**Comparing our first `LogisticRegression` model with our `base`**, we can see that our `LogisticRegression` model does somewhat better at predicting `churn` with a higher True Positive Rate than our `base`.

![alt text](Phase_3_Project/Images/Base vs Log.jpeg)

To choose the right solver, we run this model with both L1 and L2 solvers. It looks like the Logisic L1 model does better than both previous models but only slightly. However our class imbalance makes it difficult to assess accurately and needs to be addressed.

After applying `SMOTE` with an even 0:1 split, we cross validate our model with the `ModCrossVal` class created to make cross validation an easier process. Our model performs nearly the same on the train and test (validation) data. We can probably get this even higher after we simplify our model some more.

Model Name| CV Train Mean | CV Test Mean |  CV Test Std |
| :---:   | :---: | :---: | :---: | 
| Logistic L1 | 0.786565 |0.773988 |	0.024945 |
